docs(introduction): add telemetry page (#677)
camunda/camunda-docs-manual: content/introduction/telemetry.md

---

title: 'Telemetry'
weight: 45

menu:
  main:
    identifier: "user-guide-introduction-telemetry"
    parent: "user-guide-introduction"

---

By collecting environment and usage data, we will be able to offer a great and stable user experience when using Camunda. The insights into common environment setups and product usage patterns we can gather will help us to make product development decisions to your benefit. Data collection will be performed only after explicitly enabling a [process engine configuration][engine-config] property which by default is not applied. The configuration can be changed during runtime at any time via Java API or [Rest API][telemetry-config-rest].

The collected data will be sent only once in 24 hours and upon closing of the process engine by scheduling a Java timer task that sends the data via an HTTP request. The process engine work will not be affected in case of a problem during the processing of the data.

## Collected Data

> The full list of the collected data can be found below, followed by a real case example. The data can be separated into three groups: general data, meta/environment data, and usage data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can find below the full list of the collected data, followed by a real-world example. The data can be categorized into three groups: general data, meta/environment data, and usage data.
```

> ### General data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### General Data

```

> Contains information about the process engine.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The "General Data" category contains information about the process engine:
```

> * installation - id that is stored as process engine property
> * product name - identifying the usage of the process engine
> * product version - identifying the process engine version
> * product edition - identifying whether `community` or `enterprise` version is used

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Installation - an id that is stored as process engine configuration property
* Product name - the name of the product (i.e., `Camunda BPM Runtime`)
* Product version - the version of the process engine (i.e., `7.X.Y`)
* Product edition - the edition of the product (i.e., either `community` or `enterprise`)
```

### Meta/Environment Data

> Contains information about the environmental setup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The "Meta/Environment Data" category contains information about the environmental setup:
```

> * database vendor and version
> * application server vendor and version

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Database vendor and version
* Application server vendor and version
```

> ### Usage data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Usage Data
```

> Contains entries that give insights into which features and components are used in the process engine.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The "Usage Data" category contains information about the used features and components of the process engine:
```

> * commands count - the count of executed commands after the last retrieved data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Commands count - the count of commands executed within 24 hours
```

### Example

```
{
    "installation": "8343cc7a-8ad1-42d4-97d2-43452c0bdfa3",
    "product": {
      "name": "Camunda BPM Runtime",
      "version": "7.13.0",
      "edition": "community",
      "internals": {
        "database": {  
          "vendor": "h2",
          "version": "1.4.190 (2015-10-11)"
        },
        "application-server": {
          "vendor": "Wildfly",
          "version": "WildFly Full 19.0.0.Final (WildFly Core 11.0.0.Final) - 2.0.30.Final"
        },
        "commands": {
          "StartProcessInstanceCmd": {"count": 40},
          "FetchExternalTasksCmd":  {"count": 100}
        }
      }
    }
}
```

### Logger

> A telemetry logger exists that logs details for the information that is sent or problems when the data is sent when the telemetry is enabled. For further informaion check the [Logging]({{< ref "/user-guide/logging.md" >}}) page in the User Guide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A telemetry logger exists to log details about the sent information and error details in case the data couldn't be collected or sent. For further information check the [Logging]({{< ref "/user-guide/logging.md" >}}) page in the User Guide.
```

### Limitations in Collected Information

In certain scenarios, some of the information will not be retrieved due to limitations of the implementation.

> The application server information cannot be obtained in an embedded process engine setup where no web applications (e.g. Tasklist, Cockpit, Rest application) are not deployed and used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The application server information cannot be obtained in an embedded process engine setup where no web applications (e.g. Tasklist, Cockpit, REST application) are not deployed and used.
```

## Toggle telemetry

### Process Engine Configuration

> Use the `initializeTelemetry` configuration [property][engine-config] to enable the telemetry before starting the process engine. Just add it to you process engine configuration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the `initializeTelemetry` configuration [flag][engine-config] to enable the telemetry before starting the process engine. You can simply add it to your process engine configuration:
```

```
  <property name="initializeTelemetry">true</property>
```

> Later on the telemetry can be enabled/disabled via the engine API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Later on, the telemetry can be enabled/disabled via the engine API.
```

### Java/Rest API

> The configuration of the telemetry can be changed via our API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can change the telemetry configuration via our API.
```

To enable/disable telemetry via Java API:

```java
  managementService.toggleTelemetry(true);
```

> To achieve the same, you can also use the respective Rest API request. For more information, have a look at the [telemetry][telemetry-config-rest] page in the Rest API documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To achieve the same, you can also use the respective REST API request. For more information, have a look at the [telemetry][telemetry-config-rest] page in the REST API documentation.
```

## Legal Note

> Before you install a Camunda BPM Runtime version >= 7.14.0-alpha1 or activate the telemetry functionality, please make sure that you are authorized to take this step, and that the installation or activation of the [telemetry functionality][engine-config] is not in conflict with any internal company policies, compliance guidelines, any contractual or other provisions or obligations of your company.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before you install a Camunda BPM Runtime version >= 7.14.0-alpha1 or activate the telemetry functionality, please make sure that you are authorized to take this step, and that the installation or activation of the [telemetry functionality][engine-config] is not in conflict with any company-internal policies, compliance guidelines, any contractual or other provisions or obligations of your company.
```

Camunda cannot be held responsible in the event of unauthorized installation or activation of this function.

## Implementation 

> In case you want further details, you can have a look at the implementation of the telemetry topic in [our code](https://github.com/camunda/camunda-bpm-platform/blob/2015f4902853bf688216c9f75e846256d100fe95/engine/src/main/java/org/camunda/bpm/engine/impl/telemetry/reporter/TelemetrySendingTask.java#L69-L98).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In case you want further details, you can have a look at the implementation of the telemetry topic in [our code](https://github.com/camunda/camunda-bpm-platform/blob/master/engine/src/main/java/org/camunda/bpm/engine/impl/telemetry/reporter/TelemetrySendingTask.java#L69-L98).
```
Can we link here to `master`? The implementation might change in the future, and this documentation "pretends" that the implementation won't ever change. If we change the location of the `TelemetrySendingTask`, we would be notified for the master branch due to docs link checking, right? I think this is enough to maintain that the link keeps working in the future.

Maybe we can add some more text that this shows the current development version and older implementation versions can be found by changing `master` to the respective `7.X.0` version.

Author: I will consider adding `master` and a note to it.
As far as I know the version place holder is not easily achievable, Nikola worked on something in that direction, I will double-check.

---

title: 'Telemetry'
weight: 45

menu:
  main:
    identifier: "user-guide-introduction-telemetry"
    parent: "user-guide-introduction"

---

> With the Camunda BPM Runtime, we strive to offer excellent user experience at a high and stable level. Collecting environment and usage data helps us to keep the level up. The insights into typical environment setups and product usage patterns will allow us to make product improvement decisions to your benefit.

Reviewer 2: At Camunda, we strive to offer excellent user experiences at a high and stable level.

> With the Camunda BPM Runtime, we strive to offer excellent user experience at a high and stable level. Collecting environment and usage data helps us to keep the level up. The insights into typical environment setups and product usage patterns will allow us to make product improvement decisions to your benefit.

Reviewer 2: At Camunda, we strive to offer excellent user experience at a high and stable level. On a strict opt-in basis, we are looking to collect environment and usage data to further improve the user experience for you. These insights help us to understand typical environment setups and product usage patterns and will be used data informed product improvement decisions to your benefit.

The Telemetry Reporter is disabled by default and only collects and sends data after you explicitly enable a [process engine configuration][engine-config] flag. The configuration can be changed at any time during runtime via Java API or [REST API][telemetry-config-rest].

The collected data will be sent once in 24 hours via HTTP, which is scheduled by a Java timer task. We took good care that your process automation will not be negatively affected in case the Telemetry Reporter suddenly faces an unexpected error. Furthermore, no data will be collected and sent when you stop the process engine.

The Telemetry Reporter only collects and sends data after you explicitly enable a [process engine configuration][engine-config] flag, which is by default disabled. The configuration can be changed at any time during runtime via Java API or [REST API][telemetry-config-rest].

The collected data will be sent once in 24 hours via HTTP, which is scheduled by a Java timer task. We took good care that your process automation will not be negatively affected in case the Telemetry Reporter suddenly faces an unexpected error. Furthermore, no data will be collected and sent when you stop the process engine.

> ## Collected Data

Reviewer 2: ## Collected Data

Below you find the full list of data we want to collect, followed by a real-world example. On a conceptual level, they can be categorized into general data, meta/environment data, and usage data.

### General Data

The "General Data" category contains information about the process engine:

* Installation - an id that is stored as process engine configuration property
* Product name - the name of the product (i.e., `Camunda BPM Runtime`)
* Product version - the version of the process engine (i.e., `7.X.Y`)
* Product edition - the edition of the product (i.e., either `community` or `enterprise`)

### Meta/Environment Data
The "Meta/Environment Data" category contains information about the environmental setup:

* Database vendor and version
* Application server vendor and version

### Usage Data
The "Usage Data" category contains information about the used features and components of the process engine:

* Commands count - the count of executed commands after the last retrieved data. It could be from the previous 24 hours if the data have been reported then, and the process engine has not been closed during that time. Whenever the process engine is shutdown, the currently collected data is reported immediately.
* Metrics count - the collected metrics are number of root process instance executions started, number of activity instances started or also known as flow node instances, number of executed decision instances, and unique task workers. The counts are collected from the start of the engine or the last reported time if the engine is already running for more than 24 hours.

### Example

```
{
    "installation": "8343cc7a-8ad1-42d4-97d2-43452c0bdfa3",
    "product": {
      "name": "Camunda BPM Runtime",
      "version": "7.13.0",
      "edition": "community",
      "internals": {
        "database": {  
          "vendor": "h2",
          "version": "1.4.190 (2015-10-11)"
        },
        "application-server": {
          "vendor": "Wildfly",
          "version": "WildFly Full 19.0.0.Final (WildFly Core 11.0.0.Final) - 2.0.30.Final"
        },
        "commands": {
          "StartProcessInstanceCmd": {"count": 40},
          "FetchExternalTasksCmd":  {"count": 100}
        },
        "metrics": {
          "root-process-instances": { "count": 936 },
          "flow-node-instances": { "count": 6125 },
          "executed-decision-instances": { "count": 732 },
          "unique-task-workers": { "count": 50 }
        }
      }
    }
}
```

### Logger

A telemetry logger exists to log details about the sent information and error details in case the data couldn't be collected or sent. For further information check the [Logging]({{< ref "/user-guide/logging.md" >}}) page in the User Guide.

### Limitations in Collected Information

In certain scenarios, some of the information will not be retrieved due to the limitations of the implementation.

The application server information cannot be obtained in an embedded process engine setup where no web application (e.g. Tasklist, Cockpit, REST application) is deployed and used.

## How to enable telemetry

### Process Engine Configuration

Use the `initializeTelemetry` configuration [flag][engine-config] to enable the telemetry before starting the process engine. You can simply add it to your process engine configuration:

```
  <property name="initializeTelemetry">true</property>
```

Later on, the telemetry can be enabled/disabled via the engine API.

### Java/Rest API

You can change the telemetry configuration via our API.

To enable/disable telemetry via Java API:

```java
  managementService.toggleTelemetry(true);
```

To achieve the same, you can also use the respective REST API request. For more information, have a look at the [telemetry][telemetry-config-rest] page in the REST API documentation.

## Legal Note

Before you install a Camunda BPM Runtime version >= 7.14.0-alpha1 or activate the telemetry functionality, please make sure that you are authorized to take this step, and that the installation or activation of the [telemetry functionality][engine-config] is not in conflict with any company-internal policies, compliance guidelines, any contractual or other provisions or obligations of your company.

Camunda cannot be held responsible in the event of unauthorized installation or activation of this function.

## Implementation 

In case you want further details, you can have a look at the implementation of the telemetry topic in [our codebase](https://github.com/camunda/camunda-bpm-platform/blob/master/engine/src/main/java/org/camunda/bpm/engine/impl/telemetry/reporter/TelemetrySendingTask.java). The link leads you to the current `master` version of the feature. In case you would like to check the implementation of an old version, adjust the `master` branch to a released tag version, e.g. `7.14.0`.

[engine-config]: {{< ref "/reference/deployment-descriptors/tags/process-engine.md#initializeTelemetry" >}}
[telemetry-config-rest]: {{< ref "/reference/rest/telemetry/port-telemetry.md" >}}

Author: I applied the suggestions, thank you for the feedback.

### Usage Data
The "Usage Data" category contains information about the used features and components of the process engine:

> * Commands count - the count of executed commands after the last retrieved data. It could be from the last 24 hours if the data have been reported then and the process engine has not been close during that time. Or it could be the count of the executed commands for the 3 hours when the process engine has been closed. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Commands count - the count of executed commands after the last retrieved data. It could be from the previous 24 hours if the data have been reported then, and the process engine has not been closed during that time. Whenever the process engine is shutdown, the currently collected data is reported immediately.
```
